What is JSX? (#5)
complate/complate.github.io: content/what-is-jsx.md

The JSX specification defines how a JavaScript transpiler should translate JSX blocks
into a series of `createElement` calls. But the `createElement` function
itself is provided by a JSX _implementation_. This determines how the actual components
need to be defined. We will go into the specific details about the complate
implementation below, but first we want to look at a few more details about the
JSX implementation.

<!--
	here I want HTML so that I can define an anchor element to the section and
	link to it!
-->

### Interpolation with JavaScript Expressions

Everything which appears in a `{…}` block will be interpreted as a JavaScript
expression.

```jsx
<MyComponent title={title}>
    <p>{description}</p>
</MyComponent>
```

will become

```javascript
createElement(MyComponent, { title: title },
    createElement("p", null, description));
```

Thus we use JavaScript expressions for conditionals:

```jsx
<MyComponent title={title || "unknown"}>
    {description && (
        <p>{description}</p>
    )}
</MyComponent>
```

Similarly, loops are expressions as well:

```jsx
<ul>
    {items.map(item => (
        <li>{item}</li>
    ))}
</ul>
```

> ### Special Cases for Boolean Attributes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Special Cases for Boolean Parameters
```

createElement(MyComponent, { title: title },
    createElement("p", null, description));
```

In order for this to work, the complate `createElement` function needs
to be available in the JavaScript scope.

`createElement` in complate expects a user defined component (called a macro)
to be a function with the signature `(params, ...children)` and to return a JSX
expression. An example definition for `MyComponent` could be:

```jsx
function MyComponent({ title }, ...children) {
    return <article>
        <h2>{title}</h2>
        {children}
    </article>;
}
```

This is a complate specific implementation detail: in other JSX implementations
a user defined component could be a class, but the JSX spec itself does not make
any statement about what a user defined component is, other than that it should
be in the scope of the application.

### Dealing with Boolean Parameters

complate ensures that boolean parameters in macros are correctly translated to
HTML boolean attributes. This means that the JSX `<div hidden={expression}>`
will be correctly translated to `<div hidden>` or `<div>` based on the
result of the JavaScript `expression` that we evaluate. complate considers

> "blank" values (`false`, `undefined`, `null`) to be falsey.

Reviewer: This seems potentially misleading: complate does _not_ know which HTML attributes are boolean (e.g. `disabled`, `hidden`) and which aren't (e.g. `aria-disabled`, `aria-hidden`). Instead, it merely turns a `true` value into a boolean attribute (`<… disabled>`) and omits such attributes for falsy values.

How about something like this:

> complate turns boolean parameter values into corresponding HTML attributes. Thus `<div hidden={true}>` becomes `<div hidden>` whereas `<div hidden={false}>` becomes simply `<div>` - yet `<div aria-hidden="true">` remains just that. Note that for convenience, "blank" values (`false`, `undefined`, `null`) are all considered falsey in this context.

title: What is JSX?

What is JSX?
============

JSX Fundamentals
----------------

[JSX](https://facebook.github.io/jsx/) is a syntax extension for JavaScript

> which allows you to write declarative HTML like code in your JavaScript files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which allows embedding declarative HTML-like code within JavaScript.
```

> It is not a part of the ECMAScript spec and instead requires a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It requires a
```

[transpiler](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Source-to-source_compiler) to

> translate JSX definitions into pure JavaScript.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
turn JSX into executable JavaScript.
```

> JSX is an HTML like [syntactical sugar](https://reactjs.org/docs/jsx-in-depth.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Essentially, JSX is just [syntactic sugar](https://reactjs.org/docs/jsx-in-depth.html)
```

> for the function signature `createElement(component, params, ...children)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for the function signature `createElement(tag, params, ...children)`.
```

(see l. 65)

We easily recognize the following as being HTML:

```html
<p class="sample">Hello World</p>
```

> JSX understands this and tranlates it to the following function call:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As JSX, this translates to the following expression:
```

```javascript
createElement("p", { class: "sample" }, "Hello World");
```

And just as HTML is composable, so also is JSX:

```html
<article class="blog-post">
	<h2>Hello World</h2>
	<p>lorem ipsum</p>
</article>

> ```

Reviewer: While I'm an avowed tabvocate, in text documents like this I've come to accept (four) spaces for indentation (arguably in this context presentation is an important factor, so more alignment than indentation):
https://github.com/complate/complate-stream/blob/77faf430a9cf04a9b19b1c623e6e72d7230e7f03/.editorconfig#L15
(In fact, you do use spaces in various places below.)

Author: 😏

becomes

```javascript
createElement("article", { class: "blog-post" },
	createElement("h2", null, "Hello World"),
	createElement("p", null, "lorem ipsum"));
```

> And now we can leverage the power of JSX to not only create existing HTML

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And now we can leverage the power of JSX to not only generate standardized HTML
```

> elements but to write our own element definitions.

Reviewer: I like this way of phrasing it! Nevertheless, it might be confusing WRT custom elements: We're encapsulating groups of elements along with their attributes (providing prefabs, if you will) rather than just non-standardized tag names. Perhaps we could clarify this by mentioning "component", somehow?

For instance:

```jsx
<MyComponent title="Hello World">
	<p>lorem ipsum</p>
</MyComponent>
```

will be translated to

```javascript
createElement(MyComponent, { title: "Hello World" },
	createElement("p", null, "lorem ipsum"));
```

> Here JSX recognizes an element which is capitalized as being a user defined

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> component and will pass `MyComponent` as a variable reference into the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Capitalized tags signify user-defined components. Here instead of a string JSX will pass  `MyComponent` as a variable reference into the
```

`createElement` function.

This is the point in the documentation where the JSX specification and the
JSX implementation usually become hopelessly intertwined.

> In the following image we can see where the distinction occurs.

Reviewer: While I'm sympathetic to this, [Strunk & White](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Elements_of_Style#Content) would argue the first sentence doesn't add anything _for readers' benefit_. Thus:

```suggestion
The following image illustrates the relationship between the generic JSX specification and corresponding `createElement` implementations (of which there's more than one).
```

(There's probably better ways to phrase this though.)

> ![A file with JSX blocks is transpiled into JavaScript with createElement calls. These createElement calls are then interpreted by the JSX implementation](jsx-transpilation-and-interpretation.svg)

Reviewer: ✍️ 👏

The JSX specification defines how a JavaScript transpiler should translate JSX blocks
into a series of `createElement` calls. But the `createElement` function

> comes from a JSX _implementation_ and will determine how the actual components

Reviewer: ```suggestion
itself is provided by a JSX _implementation_. This determines how the actual components
```

> need to be defined. We will go into the specific details about how the complate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
need to be defined. We will go into the specific details about the complate
```

(Not sure whether anything got lost here?)

implementation below, but first we want to look at a few more details about the
JSX implementation.

<!--
	here I want HTML so that I can define an anchor element to the section and
	link to it!
-->

### Interpolation with JavaScript Expressions

> Everything which appears in a `{ }` block will be interpreted as a JavaScript

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Everything which appears in a `{…}` block will be interpreted as a JavaScript
```

expression.

```jsx
<MyComponent title={title}>
    <p>{description}</p>
</MyComponent>
```

will become

```javascript
createElement(MyComponent, { title: title },
	createElement("p", null, description));
```

> This means that we can use JavaScript expressions to express conditionals

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thus we use JavaScript expressions for conditionals:
```

(in fact, we have to; there are no `if`/`else` blocks - arguably that's more of a downside than an advantage WRT both readability and accessibility)

```jsx
<MyComponent title={title || "unknown"}>
    {description && (
        <p>{description}</p>
    )}
</MyComponent>
```

> or for a loop

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, loops are expressions as well:
```

```jsx
<List>
    {items.map(item => (
        <span>{item}</span>
    ))}
</List>

> ```

Reviewer: `<ul>` and `<li>` might be more straightforward here?

### Special Cases for Boolean Attributes

Attributes without an explicit value in a JSX expression are interpreted as
having the boolean value `true`. This means that the following two JSX blocks
are identical:

```jsx
<button disabled>
```

```jsx
<button disabled={true}>

> ```

Reviewer: It seems to me that here you're conflating the JSX transpilation (boolean parameter turns into `true`) and complate's handling of boolean attributes (`createElement("button", { disabled: true })` resulting in `<button disabled>`)? Or at least it's hard to distinguish as a reader, which runs contrary to your stated goal? (This is also why I use "parameter" instead of "attribute" for JSX code - not that that's an obvious distinction... )

How about this:

> JSX supports a shorthand for boolean parameters, thus ` <button disabled>` is identical to `<button disabled={true}>`.

(Affording a single sentence its own heading feels somewhat awkward though... )

> ### Fragment provided by JSX Implementation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Fragment Provided by JSX Implementation
```

JSX always expects exactly one root element in an expression, but in some cases
we want to return several at once. To do this, a JSX implementation will

> provide a `Fragment` component with provides an artificial hierarchy level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
provide a `Fragment` component which provides an artificial hierarchy level that is otherwise ignored.
```

`Fragment` is also relevant at the spec (syntax) level though: `<>…</>` turns into `createElement(Fragment, null, …))`

(I'm not currently sure whether faucet supports this; it's complicated... )

Reviewer 2: Not necessarily. Babel (and other compilers, I presume) supports swapping out `Fragment` with something else. In the text, I would treat `<></>` as the user interface and `Fragment` as an implementation detail.

Reviewer: Well, yeah, the same way you don't have to call the function `React.createElement` (or even just `createElement`) - but both spec and established convention refer to this as `Fragment`. Indeed, as of now, AFAIK most complate users avoid the `<>…</>` shorthand in favor of `<Fragment>…</Fragment>`, so it seems important not to insist on the shorthand?

Reviewer 2: The (current?) spec doesn't know about `<Fragment>`, it's an implementation detail of React.

But disregarding the spec, there's a better argument for not using it. The `<>` syntax is – IMHO – not a shorthand, but just syntax. `<Fragment>` on the other hand refers to an actual entity. Syntax that looks like an entity reference but has special meaning is best avoided.

And your comparison with `React.createElement` doesn't work here because we never reference `React.createElement` in JSX user code. But we do refer to `Fragment` in JSX user code. The former having special semantics is fine, the latter not.

Reviewer: I guess I was (intentionally) conflating `Fragment` and [`JSXFragment`](https://facebook.github.io/jsx/#syntax):
> ```
> PrimaryExpression :
>     JSXElement
>     JSXFragment
> ```

I understand your point, I think, but it seems ... excessively formalistic? As in, for users, even those interested in understanding JSX vs. React vs. complate, that strikes me as a distinction without a difference? It's possible my assessment here is influenced by JSX's evolution though (the shorthand syntax is fairly new IIRC; it used to be just `<Fragment>`).

```jsx
<dl>
	{items.map(({ term, description }) => (
		<Fragment>
			<dt>{term}</dt>
			<dd>{description}</dd>
		</Fragment>
	))}
</dl>
```

> ### Trying it out

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Trying It Out
```

You can try out how JSX translation works in the

> [Babel online compiler](https://babeljs.io/repl#?babili=false&browsers=&build=&builtIns=false&spec=false&loose=false&code_lz=DwWQngwg9gtgDlAdgU0QFwARoJZoDbIC8ARABLJ55QYDqUATngCbEB8AUAJDBytX3IYGbHADOAVxjAA9L3Yzw0eElRpWQA&debug=false&forceAllTransforms=false&shippedProposals=false&circleciRepo=&evaluate=false&fileSize=false&timeTravel=false&sourceType=module&lineWrap=true&presets=es2015%2Creact%2Cstage-2&prettier=false&targets=&version=7.7.3&externalPlugins=).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Babel online compiler](https://babeljs.io/repl#?presets=react&code_lz=DwWQngwg9gtgDlAdgU0QFwARoJZoDbIC8ARABLJ55QYDqUATngCbEB8AUAJDBytX3IYGbHADOAVxjAA9L3Yzw0eElRpWQA).
```

I've removed unused URI parameters, because I'm just that pedantic.

It translates it using the `createElement` function from the React library,
but we can also tell Babel to use a different `createElement` function from a
library like complate.

> The complate JSX implementation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
complate's `createElement` Implementation
```

-------------------------------

> Now we want to look at the specifics of the complate JSX implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we want to look at the specifics of complate's own JSX implementation.
```

We saw before that

```jsx
<MyComponent title="Hello World">
	<p>lorem ipsum</p>
<MyComponent>
```

becomes

```javascript
createElement(MyComponent, { title: title },
	createElement("p", null, description));
```

In order for this to work, the complate `createElement` function needs
to be available in the JavaScript scope.

> `createElement` in complate expects a user defined component (called a macro)

Reviewer 2: Should we mention that class components also exist? (And are maybe not supported in complate?)

Reviewer: Because complate macros are necessarily stateless (render and forget, if you will), there's never been any need for supporting classes AFAIK.

However, this does make for a good example of how implementations (the "interpretation" step) might differ.

Reviewer 2: The JSX spec doesn't talk about state at all. Indeed, it is an implementation detail of React which one allows state (nowadays, both forms do).

Reviewer: Yes, agreed - however, JSX also doesn't care whether the identifier is a function, a class or indeed a string (think `Heading = condition ? "h2" : "h3"` → `<Heading>`)?

Author: Can you use classes in complate (I've personally never done so).

However, I have used `Heading = condition ? "h2" : "h3"` → `<Heading>` 🤔 and I know that worked.

Reviewer: Nope, complate doesn't support classes: Because there's no state or life cycle, that never came up except in relation to other JSX implementations (notably React).

to be a function with the signature `(params, ...children)` and to return a JSX
expression. An example definition for `MyComponent` could be:

```jsx
function MyComponent({ title }, ...children) {
    return <article>
        <h2>{title}</h2>
        {children}
    </article>;
}
```

> ### Dealing with boolean attributes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Dealing with Boolean Attributes
```

We saw above that JSX interprets an attribute without a value as being

> the same as the boolean value true. complate also ignores the blank

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the same as the boolean value `true`. complate also ignores "blank"
```

values (`false`, `undefined`, `null`) so `<button disabled={undefined}>`

> and `<button disabled={null}>` generate the same `<button>` HTML Tag

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and `<button disabled={null}>` both result in the `disabled` attribute being discarded within HTML output.
```

> without the `disabled` property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

complate will also ensure that boolean properties are correctly set on
HTML elements. This means that `<button disabled={true}>` will be

> correctly translated to the HTML Tag `<button disabled>`.

Reviewer: As mentioned elsewhere, this is a little tricky because it might be misunderstood: complate does _not_ know about boolean attributes the same way [it knows about void elements](https://github.com/complate/complate-stream/blob/77faf430a9cf04a9b19b1c623e6e72d7230e7f03/src/html.js#L6-L12), so it does not handle, say, [`aria-disabled`])(https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-1.1/#aria-disabled) (which is _not- a boolean attribute). That's a subtle distinction lost on many, but this might be interpreted as complate attempting to remedy that situation, which it can't.

complate also ignores blank children so that we can more easily use
JavaScript expressions for conditionals.

Here a `<p>` tag will only be generated when the description value

> is truthy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is truthy:
```

```jsx
<article>

> 	{description && <p>{description}</p>}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    {description && (
        <p>{description}</p>
    )}
```

<article>
```

### Multiple JSX Implementations

Up until now we have skirted around the question of what the `createElement`
function in complate actually does. This is because we decided to define the
contract for component definitions separately from the actual implementation
of the `createElement` functionality. Because we have optimized for simplicity
and portability, this has allowed us to create multiple `createElement`
implemenations which we can choose based on our use case.

#### complate-stream

> The first complate implementation is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first complate implementation was
```

or 

```suggestion
The primary complate implementation was
```

I'm not actually sure either is true though... 😁 Also, I _might_ be splitting hairs here (and only here, natch).

[complate-stream](https://github.com/complate/complate-stream) which is
optimized for server-side rendering. complate-stream translates the
component macros to HTML and writes the resulting HTML to a stream.

> The stream here is also an abstraction: because the `complate-stream`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The stream here is also an abstraction: Because the `complate-stream`
```

implementation is minimal, we can evaluate it in the JavaScript runtime of

> a backend language and provide a stream which makes sense for the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a back-end language and provide a stream which makes sense for the
```

runtime environment, e.g. hooking into the HTTP request implementation of a
framework in order to write the HTML directly into the response body.
This is exactly what we have done for
[Java](https://github.com/complate/complate-java)

> and [Ruby](https://github.com/complate/complate-ruby).

Reviewer: There are others:

* [complate-express](https://github.com/complate/complate-express)
* [complate-http4k](https://github.com/complate/complate-http4k)
* ¯\\\_(ツ)_/¯

Author: :D I actually avoided listing the others so that we wouldn't get in a fight about oxford commas. :)

But is the http4k implementation really usable? I've used the express adapter, so I know that one is, but I've never tried the http4k Adapter and am hesitant to link to it unless it is a really good example.

Reviewer: That's a perfectly valid strategy: Limiting lists to two entries so we're never tempted to insert spurious commas. 👌 

I agree the http4k adaptor is _probably_ more of a proof of concept - but I don't really know and it might be [enough for interested parties to improve it](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stigmergy)?

#### complate-dom

We also provide the
[complate-dom](https://github.com/complate/complate-dom) implementation

> whose `createElement` implementation uses the Browser API in order to create

Reviewer: ```suggestion
whose tiny `createElement` implementation uses browsers' API in order to create
```

> DOM Elements which are rendered on the client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DOM elements which are rendered on the client.
```
